The government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and rival M23 rebels have agreed to ease aid deliveries and release prisoners, as mediators push to resolve a years-long conflict that has persisted despite multiple peace deals.
The two sides announced the measures in a joint statement shared by the US Department of State on Saturday, following five days of talks in Switzerland.
Recommended Stories
list of 3 items- list 1 of 3At least 43 people killed in ADF attack in northeast DR Congo, army says
- list 2 of 3Celebrations erupt as DR Congo ends over 50-year World Cup wait
- list 3 of 3Republic of Congo votes in polls that could extend Nguesso’s 42-year rule
“The parties agreed to refrain from any action that would undermine the principled delivery of humanitarian assistance within the territories impacted by the conflict,” remarked the statement.
Both sides additionally pledged not to target civilians and to facilitate medical care for the wounded and sick as they noted progress on a protocol for humanitarian access and judicial protections.
They agreed to release prisoners within 10 days as portion of efforts “to continue building confidence”.
In addition, the parties signed a memorandum of understanding for a ceasefire monitoring mechanism that will “begin conducting surveillance, monitoring, verification, and reporting on the implementation of the permanent ceasefire between the parties”.
Since 2021, the M23, backed by Rwanda, has seized territory in eastern DRC, a region ravaged by further than 30 years of conflict.
While the two sides signed a United States-brokered peace agreement in December, fighting has continued, most recently reaching the highland areas of South Kivu, according to media reports.
In a statement concluding week, Human Rights Watch accused the parties of blocking aid deliveries and stopping civilians from fleeing the South Kivu highlands.
“Civilians in South Kivu’s highlands are facing a dire humanitarian crisis and live in fear of abuses by all parties,” indicated Clementine de Montjoye, senior Great Lakes researcher at Human Rights Watch.
The latest round of talks, held in the Swiss Riviera town of Montreux, included representatives from Qatar, the US, Switzerland, the African Union (AU) Commission, and Togo serving as the AU mediator.